# MA2---Towards-real-time-support-for-a-suicide-prevention-hotline-operators-
Challenging times such as the current COVID-19 pandemic can have a major impact on mental  health1. One of the possible consequences of this downward trend in mental health is an  increase in the prevalence of both mental illnesses such as depression and suicidal ideation.   In the Netherlands, 113 suicide prevention runs the national suicide prevention helpline. Help  seekers can reach out to the helpline by calling in, but they can also start to chat with one of  the 113 volunteers. In the help-line at 113, the volunteers apply motivational interviewing2  during  their  conversations  with  the  help  seekers.  At  this  time,  113  uses  previous  conversations  as  an  educative  tool  to  improve  their  expertise  in  the  application  of  motivational  interviewing.  However,  with  this  approach  many  chat  sessions  are  never  processed. To address this gap, lexical analysis of all chat sessions could be used analysis as  an instrument to detect the cognitive and lexical markers of suicidal ideation and intent,  raising the prospect of improving the effectiveness of suicide hotlines with interventions  targeted at cognitive distortions associated with suicidal ideation. Examples of such analysis  include sentiment analysis, e.g. ANEW3 or LIWC4, the annotation of cognitive distortions5 (as  defined in cognitive behavioural therapy6), and the annotation of the effects of motivational  interviewing2.  The goal of this project is to track emotional and therapeutic/psychological features in the  chat sessions that are recorded at the 113 helpline and use this information to provide the  operators  at  the  helpline  with  real-time  feedback.  With  this  feedback,  you  will  help  the  operators assist the help seekers in their efforts to help each individual that reaches out to  the suicide prevention hotline.
